[Music]
hello everyone i'm pleased to have two
of
the uk's finest scholars here with me
today dr james orr and dr nigel bigger
dr orr is university lecturer in
philosophy of religion at cambridge he's
director of trinity forum oxford and
trinity forum cambridge and a regular
contributor to the times literary
supplement and the critic magazine
formerly mcdonald postdoctoral fellow at
christchurch oxford dr orr holds a phd
in m phil in philosophy of religion from
saint john's college cambridge and a
double first in classics from bellio
college oxford
he's the author of the mind of god and
the works of nature
2019 and co-editor of neo aristotelian
metaphysics and the theology of nature
that's 2022 and routledge published that
dr nigel baker is the regis professor of
moral and pastoral theology at oxford
where he also directs the mcdonald
center for theology ethics and public
life
he's also an anglican priest
and his professorial chair at oxford is
tied to a cannonary in christ church
cathedral oxford he holds a ba from
oxford a masters in christian studies
from regent college vancouver and an m.a
and ph.d in christian theology and
ethics from the university of chicago
before his current post he occupied
chairs in theology at the university of
leeds and at trinity college dublin
among his many books are the recent
what's wrong with rights oxford 2020
between kin and cosmopolis an ethic of
the nation 2014 and in defense of war
oxford 2013
as well as behaving in public how to do
christian ethics
2011. provocative titles well thank you
very much
for agreeing to talk with me today uh
james why did you want to have this
discussion
well my first reason for uh wanting to
have a discussion with you and and
together with nigel is that um i i felt
that you were developing a voice and a a
kind of acuity in the public square on
questions of religion of uh meaning of
transcendence and those were the kinds
of questions that drew me first to
the academy out of the law but the kinds
of questions that i think i've never
been more urgent or more salient to
to individuals
in the west to society in the west
and so i thought this is an
extraordinary opportunity to
talk with you a little bit about your
views on religion uh and to hear nigel's
too of course we've talked a few we've
had many conversations over the years
and nigel's been a great mentor to me um
and i had a few happy years with him uh
in in oxford but uh yeah this is a it's
an amazing platform that you've carved
out for yourself and i'm really looking
forward to the conversation
so what makes you think it's so urgent
and salient now
well um
i think that
questions of identity questions of
belonging questions of significance
um
both as those are kind of answers to
them are kind of positively expressed
but also negatively expressed the sort
of sense of crisis in in the west uh at
the kind of level of of individuals but
also trying to work out
where it is we're going as a society
particularly now that we've slipped a
lot of our moorings that used to
anchor us in
as it were a stable normative universe
uh we told certain
stories about where we'd come from where
we're going but broadly speaking we're
not believed by everybody but broadly
speaking gave us the kinds of parameters
the kinds of guardrails the kind of
coordination mechanisms
even the kinds of stigmas that helped us
to
pursue the common good together for all
of our different disagreements okay so
you
you offered an implicit description of
identity there essentially and and
that's quite interesting because so much
of the current political discourse
centers on
a theory of identity
but it's not a theory of identity that's
based on identification with the central
set of stories or
or
and so and that's something that's very
very different and
you also mentioned a cl in some sense a
collective view of the future that's
right yes i mean so i i think the fact
that we're all talking about identity
now in a way that we simply weren't
before
is not a sign that we all know what it
means but actually a sign that there's a
kind of dislocation
um identitas in latin doesn't mean
anything at all it just means it means
sameness
um and i think
you don't really start talking about
something until it starts to disappear i
think it's hegel who says at one point
that the the owl of minerva spreads its
wings uh at dusk by which he meant
this is in the introduction to the
philosophy of right by which he meant
well lots of disagreement about exactly
what he what he meant but it seems to be
the case that he it was philosophy only
starts to take a proper appraisal
a proper diagnosis of what's happened
after it's happened and really the point
where it's too late to do much about it
right so the question doesn't arise when
everyone is in implicit agreement
i think that's right i mean this is the
old david foster wallace uh commencement
address joke of the goldfish going for a
walk one morning in the goldfish bowl
and another goldfish turns to him and
says how's the water and the goldfish
says what's water
well
we're now saying what what's your
identity
even 25 years ago that would have been
in a sense
a meaningless question what are you
talking about what is identity
uh i i had a student the other day who
came to me and said i i want to look at
identity in augustine
and i said well
what do you want to do that for and he
said well
everybody's talking about it the
university's talking about it the
culture's talking about it i thought i
could
go and read the confessions and the
trinitate and the city of god and and
try and work out what augustine has to
say about identity
and i had to tell him that that
augustine would have been mystified if
you'd asked him
what he meant by identity
um it meant something technical and
really rather
trivial and and empty um but so these
are new ideas but they're very dominant
ideas and they're ideas that we don't
really have the answer to
but we're happy to project onto the
canon we're project to project back into
the past
reminds me of nietzsche's statement
about the question of morality
said that
well when you're embedded in a culture
that has a single morality
the question is what's right and wrong
within that structure but then when
you're subjected to the onslaught of
many moralities the question of what is
morality per se starts to arise and so
the questions get deeper and maybe
that's a consequence of
you know the intense cultural
intermingling that characterizes the
world now and the un i mean that's very
rich and it's enriched all of us but
it's also deeply unsettling and it
raises questions and of course
technological transformation does the
same not least when it involves
reproductive technology let's say and
changes the relationship between the
sexes i'm going to switch to to dr baker
and ask him the same
could i just make comment on on this
business of identity jordan because i i
i mean i i do think
certainly in some cases
identity is hooked into some kind of
grand narrative i mean i i guess i i
think of human beings as
as uh
we live our little lives and and we
often
need a bigger story to
identify with to give ourselves a
significance that by ourselves we just
don't have now that may not be the case
everywhere but i'm thinking particularly
of of nationalism i'm i'm scottish born
i
i i identify as british because i both
english and scottish
i oppose scottish separation from the uk
um but but you know when scots people
say you know i'm i'm scots i have a
scottish identity
uh i want to say well
okay that's fine but can you give an
account of it
and it seems to me that um
one one can hold identities to account
in in this sense that
when i claim an identity i'm i'm
identifying myself with something so
when i say i'm
scottish or british
i have in my mind a certain set of
stories a certain set of heroes a
certain set of values that i claim as my
own and identify with
and it seems to me that
insofar as the stories and the heroes
and the values
uh have moral content
that they are they are morally
accountable and can be morally
criticized so identity is not a kind of
that's not bedrock okay so that raises
another question as far as i'm concerned
a couple is first of all
you know we might not identify with who
we are we might identify with
who we would like to be or what the
ideal is and when you talk about you
know our finite mortality and our
longing for something greater i mean i
would think of that as part of a prime
of
of the religious impulse essentially
that guides us to toward the ideal that
we're attempting to manifest and so
there has to be something beyond us that
we identify with and then i would wonder
if it's if it's not
abstractly beyond let's say in the form
of of a religious notion then it gets
truncated into something like
nationalism or something political
that's that that get that then gets
inflated in significance to divine
status because the proper
target of identification is lacking
what do you think of that yeah well i
think that's that's a danger isn't it
that they the grand narratives we
identify with
we divinize them we give them an
absolute status and and nationalism at
its worst does that of course so so the
nation becomes god and the fact that was
was it uh
uh talked about or was it you know it's
fixture i think talked about
um
the nation being immortal but the member
of the nation of course is not but you
gain a kind of vicarious immortality by
belonging to the nation which always
continues which actually it doesn't but
never mind but there is a there's a
really religiosity to that but i i don't
think that
but all identities have to absolutize
themselves in that way so
i identify as british american american
i could have lived and worked in north
america all my life i chose not to
because i felt
commitment to this country does that
mean that i think that the uk is eternal
and absolute not at all i mean it didn't
exist before 1707
it may not exist if scotland separates
so but you have a place you have a place
for the relationship with the absolute
in your life and so it's conceivable
that the nation didn't have to expand
for you to fill that gap i mean i know
in quebec there is a very interesting
poll
you know quebec was the last western
country in some sense to
undergo the transformation from deep
religiosity almost feudal religiosity to
secular status that didn't happen until
the 1950s and then quebec abandoned
catholicism in a at a rate that was just
absolutely staggering but the gallup
organization indicated that if you were
a lapsed catholic you were 10 times more
likely to be a separatist
oh right right a piece of information i
was looking for for years
just on that i mean i i i've noticed and
there's no
proof here
yet but i've noticed that uh
the rise of scottish nationalism uh is
is correlated with the precipitate
decline in membership of the church of
scotland
now so i i'm wondering is there a kind
of transference here from
from presbyterian religion into scottish
nationalism i suspect there is because
that reminds me of the another central
nichian idea which was that
a couple of ideas was that
as a consequence of the death of god
which is of course something that
nietzsche decried
he thought it was a murderous act that
we would become prone to either nihilism
or a form of radical communitarianism he
identified that with essentially with
communism or at least with the spirit of
communism at that point
and then i would say that the rise of
fascism these are in my interpretation
these are fundamentally replacement
religions except that
they have pathologies associated with
them that a genuine religion and we
could talk about what that might be at
some point it was one of the questions
you guys proposed
um they have pathologies that genuine
religions in some sense manage to skirt
do you think that that's a viable
hypothesis i mean
it's sort of predicated on the idea that
we do have a deep religious instinct
that's associated with
with our with the necessity for us to
adopt an identity
yeah so so when people deserve kind of
mainstream conventional religion they
they kind of
the religious institute gets displaced
and so in the case of nazism most
obviously um you you get quasi-religious
rituals
fascists were particularly good at those
were non-verbal so they were harder to
critique
yeah but but they they created a sense
of the transcendent
um
uh so
yes i i think that that that is a
a plausible hypothesis um the question
of
what kind of religion resists that
is an interesting one um but i guess i
guess religion has always had has had a
problem with with degenerating into
idolatry that's to say the
identification of
something human
a piece of sculpture
um a temple a nation concrete as divine
and and that that that of course is a
form of religion that
monotheism be it jewish christian or
muslim
has has been against because god
god is god and god is transcendent and
god is barely understandable by human
beings and that this is right and
there's an insistence on that i mean
part of the insistence while the present
day insistence in islam of not making
images is i believe
it's it's a it's a variant of the same
doctrine that you see in the old
testament against making idols
and i think it's attempt an attempt when
it's working properly to protect the
concretization of the absolute and and
that is this this psychological barrier
against idolatry which i think ideology
is a form of and i i suspect although
don't know that it's etymologically
related as well
and so
you know you posited right at the
beginning nigel that we are we're we're
destined in some sense to search for
something beyond ourselves that that's
part of our actual nature i guess i
would wonder too if that you know piaget
the developmental psychologist posited
the existence of a messianic stage in
late adolescent development and he he
didn't believe everyone hit that stage
of cognitive development but that many
people did and that that was the point
at which radical enculturation should
take place but it was in it was it
involved the turning outward
to broader world concerns and
and the desire to join a cause and maybe
you can see that really intensely
between the ages of 17 and 25 something
like that and then so university
students are primed for that and then
they're offered
ideology now i think instead of
well instead of what it is that we're
trying to lay out what what the
alternative to that might be
so yeah yeah
so
i wanted to ask you guys james did you
have something to say about all that
well i mean other than that to say that
you know this
there's sort of obviously good good
nationalism and bad nationalism and
often the distinction is made between
patriotism and nationalism and nigel's
written very well about this but uh it's
often overlooked i mean i think that a
lot of the problems today certainly as
we've has been part of the debate in the
in the uk in the last few years has been
this
this question of the uh are you a
citizen of anywhere or are you a citizen
of somewhere and a lot of the deep
divides in our
uh society flow from that basic
distinction the distinction that the
sociologist david goodhart drew a few
years ago and a lot of the a lot of the
differences that we're having
apparently
a lot more trivial flow really
downstream of that of of of that basic
distinction so there's a
there's an idea that eliade had about
the
the continual disappearance of god
because he he looked at nietzsche's
pronouncement and said well god has
vanished into the stratosphere of
abstraction many times throughout
history this isn't the one time only the
danger of an abstract god that can't be
represented is that he becomes so
detached from human affairs that it's as
if he's not there and so the catholic
church maybe produces saints as
intermediaries and priests to sort of
link the absolute to the to the proximal
but i wonder too is what happened with
brexit in the uk i mean i thought of
that in some sense as a tower of babel
phenomenon is that people felt that
their representation in europe was so
abstract that they were no longer
connected to their land to their town to
their community and so the distance
between them and the central authority
became too great and there was a longing
for return to something like the
concrete which i had some sympathy for
but it begs the question too is like
maybe there's a rank order of identity
and so you are
a patriot to your land but that's nested
under
under a an affiliation to something
that's absolute that isn't associated
with nationalism and
i talked with stephen fry a little bit
for example about the utility of having
a monarch
it's sort of an
analogous to that is that the monarch is
an abstract figure but but but exists
and you can have affiliation to her like
the prime minister does
and still be in charge of the state and
it's it's like
there's a hierarchy of identities and
the hierarchy has to be structured
properly or the parts start to contain
the whole in a way that's pathological
yes
yes i mean i i was just thinking as you
were speaking that certainly the way a
lot of the arguments for thinking of
one's love of country as a form of of
piety in the uh tradition of moral
theology
start from
the most intimate and the most immediate
so
it's love of love of parent your your
your biological parents you didn't
choose your parents it's as it were
you're thrown into this relationship
with him but it's the most intimate
relationship there is and similarly the
thought is that you owe your loyalty
your loves your affections to your
community and so on and so on in in ever
expanding concentric circles
but i think both aquinas and somebody
very different somebody like david hume
later on in the in the 18th century
stressed that there's as it were a kind
of
there are diminishing returns as the
concentric circles move move outward and
there's certainly a limit
and it's not a is it where maybe not not
an ideal limit but it's simply a
function of our finitude
uh and our fragility and and in the
christian tradition our fallenness that
we can't as it were love every single
human being we can't love humanity in
the abstract and nor can we love every
single human being
with the same sort of intensity
so
that might be a more positive way of
thinking about why we ought to oh what
augustine calls our common objects of
love or
we we treat our common objects of love
as as broadly proximate
but organized by the the horizon of a
kind of transcendent orientation towards
towards the source of love which of
course in the christian tradition is is
god himself
jordan i i i i i fully agree with you
that
we you know we inhabit
kind of a range of identities uh um some
more local some more regional national
global and then religious
and
each each identified each thing we
identify with
gives a certain meaning to our lives and
a certain significance
um
just wondering in terms of your
encounter with young younger people
at what point
does
religious identification begin to gain
traction
well i think there's a there's a variety
of answers to that one is that
one pathway in is is the diagnosis that
the desire for deep meaning and also
deep responsibility
is there and valid and in everyone
and to be encouraged and recognized
so there's that and then
then there's a serious discussion about
i would say about love
and truth
and the and the pragmatic utility of
both
and and both as expressions of faith
you know because you can't say well
there's evidence that
love in the broadest sense is the most
effective manner in which to orient
yourself in the world you could make a
counter case that it's power for example
and you can't prove that speaking the
truth is for the best and partly that's
because people get into trouble for
speaking the truth all the time but you
can say you can stake your life on those
two things and see what happens
and that there's an adventure in that
and and that appeal to adventure that
that's really attractive to you
especially to young men but to young
people in general and then there's one
other element which is
part of it has to be the removal of
rational objections it's like
when i did my biblical lecture series i
said i was going to stay psychological
about it except when i had to become
metaphysical because of my the
limitations of my knowledge and so i was
trying to make sense of it like how can
you have a relationship with this book
that makes sense so that you're not that
you're not crucifying your reason but
using it alongside of you and so that
it's not mere let's say superstitious
foolishness
with regards to your axiomatic
presuppositions of the form that the
rational atheists criticized so well
let's say so effectively
so i you know i said well i brought
reverence to the to genesis i said this
book's been around a long time and
there's possible there's a possibility
that there's something in it that i
that i don't understand that's appealed
to people across
history and let's approach it from that
perspective and see what we can make of
it and that
that seems to have proved extremely
popular like sort of unbelievably
popular and so
so when you mentioned uh this desire for
a deep desire in a sense for a sense for
a sense of being responsive yeah
both of those connect to me
as it were something that is given an
objective to which we are
accountable it reminds me of uh what
your compatriot charles taylor once
wrote in
in his best shortest book i'm glad to
say
the ethics of authenticity he said
reflecting on authenticity as being the
kind of uh um
universal popular value we all recognize
he said
um
authenticity only makes sense
when there's a wider given horizon that
gives it significance so so choice only
significance within a context that gives
it significance otherwise choices
caprice it's it's whimsy it it it
doesn't matter at all
and so i suppose they
i mean
seeing seeing this through christianize
as i do
um uh what we have here is
a recognition of the need for
if you like a given moral order
uh within which we are you know we have
freedom and the freedom is what makes us
responsible and and
um makes our decisions and choices
really heavy with
significance but there is something that
is given and we didn't create it
and and
a large part not the only part a large
part of the affirmation of of there
being one god
is that there is not just a physical
coherence to created reality but also a
moral coherence
um
one god okay so a couple of things i
want to talk about there so you know if
i look at authenticity from the
psychoanalytic or the psychological
perspective you talk about carl rogers
and the humanists now rogers
who i admire greatly and who taught me a
lot about listening technically
he was a humanist but he was a christian
seminarian to begin with and i want to
be missionary and so his
his psychology of human
possibility
is
secularized christianity right to the
core now it's his talk about
authenticity so he thought if you wanted
to be a good therapist that you had to
be integrated and so he talked
he's making a case for something like
this hierarchical identity that we just
discussed so imagine your identity is
probably properly structured
hierarchically with the utmost at the
top where it's supposed to be and with
everything in its proper place that
constitutes you in the broadest sense
and then you speak in some sense from
the center of that
and so there's a kind of alignment that
goes along with truthful speaking that's
that represents that authenticity and i
think that's equivalent to
well it's equivalent to trinitarian
phenomena in my estimation you know when
there's this emphasis in in the gospels
on the possibility of the spirit of god
inhabiting a group or an individual
especially in terms of their
relationship with one another their
dialogical relationship with one another
and there's really something to that
like it's it's it's not a and it seems
to be
you you can enter that space when you're
authentic in the psychological sense but
it also means that the words that you're
using spring up from the depths from the
integrated depths and that is associated
with
that's associated with
with with with being possessed by the
ideal at that moment it's something like
that and you can call that forth out of
people right if you're engaging in a
serious and honest dialogue with them
and you trust and you want the best from
them then they step up and then you can
have that kind of conversation and it's
enobling for everyone and everyone
experiences it that way
can i just suggest that i mean we're
using the word authenticity but as
listening to nigel and listening to you
now jordan it seems to me that you've
actually expressed two
two very uh different and opposing sides
of how one understands authenticity so
nigel offered the idea that authenticity
as it were requires presupposes or
requires um an author with a capital a
should we say some sort of given
objective framework that we don't we
don't script our own narrative we have
to as it were
deal with the world as it's given
um
you have elaborated beautifully and i'm
not saying that the two can't be brought
together i think this could be a very
interesting uh uh next phase of the
conversation you in drawing on rogers
and talking about the secularization of
the sense of authenticity and
and the sort of the the currents of
pneumatology and the spirit and in the
new testament at the beginning of acts
are taking a a more uh shall we say
self-scripting self-authoring idea
a account of authenticity and this goes
right back i suppose in the twentieth
some ideas about how those might be
mediated i mean
i don't think you're
you're not speaking with your own voice
when you're authentic in some sense
because your proximal concerns are not
relevant
all you're trying to do is to
state what you believe to be the case at
that moment and an honest response to
the surrounding it isn't agenda driven
except at the highest levels of that
hierarchy so the agenda might be love
and truth right but it isn't anything
proximal it's not like so for example if
i was trying to
argue against you and defeat you that's
philo
nikea which i just learned the love of
victory if i was possessed by the spirit
of the love of victory and was
attempting to defeat you then i wouldn't
be speaking in a fully authentic voice
it might be a more authentic voice than
being cowardly
but it's not as authentic as one that be
would be inspired by the highest
possible motivations and
and
my sense has been that it's it's
something like truth nested inside love
that that constitutes that highest level
of of ethical striving and so that
speaks
from with it within you perhaps and it's
strange that that would also be
associated with authenticity because in
some sense it's not you
but it is it isn't because
um
your definition of authenticity which
really
is in the sense it's it's
you expressing
your grasp of the truth
but it's not just you expressing
yourself whatever that means uh
i mean the the common understanding of
of authenticity is is self-expression
whenever someone
says that i think well you know
how do we know yourself is worth
expressing how do i know myself is worth
expressing but your way putting it
ties authenticity to my grasp
of the truth so that there is something
apart from me
uh which i'm relating to which gives it
a kind of
objectivity and and seriousness and
lack of caprice
um so okay so a couple of things off
that i mean
this insistence by the radical left on
lived experience
and its validity well it might be a
stumbling towards something like that
okay right okay well then the next thing
so let's leave i'll put that up but then
the next thing i'm thinking about is
i've really been struck constantly by
some of jung's descriptions of christ as
a member of the trinity because
jung makes much of john's sense of
christ the logos that's there across
time which i read something
as something like create the creative
consciousness that's involved in the
bringing to awareness of being something
like that so it's maybe identical to
consciousness itself at least in its
higher stages it's very abstract but
then there's christ the carpenter who
lived in a particular time and place
which is kind of a mystery because
everyone asks like in the movie jesus
christ superstar you know uh
why that time in that place and the
answer is well it has to be some bounded
time and place and so if we're if if
what christ is is a representative in
some sense of what a human being is is
that there's a divine
aspect to us which is this creative
consciousness that's very abstract but
it's also localized intensely
you know in a historic in an arbitrary
throne to use the existential phrase
historical context and then each of us
is unique in that manner but there's
something universal about each of us too
that enables us to reach out to each
other and
and also gives each of our individual
lives
a larger significance that otherwise
they just wouldn't have at all well yes
and the significance you know one of my
students once asked me a brilliant
question is like well if the if all
stories have the archetypal structure
why not just tell the same archetype
over and over
and i thought you know wasn't that so
interesting because what you want is you
want
old wine and new skins so to speak right
you want you want the universal story
particularized
and then i thought well that's exactly
what jung said about the figure of
christ is it's the universe the story
particularized and and both of those
like both the particularization and the
universality it's the intersection of
those two that produces the meaning
it also produces i guess you say meaning
i would say human dignity
because on the one hand there is
individuality
no one
quite grasps the truth or speaks the
truth in my time and place
like me
uh so
in a sense everyone is a unique prophet
and has a unique responsibility but
we are commonly subject to uh um a
universal order universal obligations
universal calling
uh which which um
uh endows our little lives with a larger
significance
i mean this this oscillation that you've
been describing so beautifully between
the universal and and the concrete the
the general and the particular you
touched on it earlier jordan when you
were talking about the iconoclasm of
judaism and islam relative to the the
shocking acceptance and indeed embracing
of particularity uh in the form of of uh
the second person of the trinity
incarnate as a human being
and that the so that the sort of
shocking christian claim is that god
leaves his authenticating signature on
the not just on the processes of history
but on this particular this particular
carpenter in in first century palestine
this is this is what it get gets hegel
and and others just so excited that it
seems to be this final synthesis where
everything can as it were
come come to come to a resting point but
as also as as nigel says it also
underwrites the the dignity
and and as it were the the the value the
intrinsic value of human beings and um
others have written about the
that's that's another major question you
know and this is something i think the
new atheists don't take into account at
all because they have this enlightenment
orientation and they attribute the idea
of human rights it's like their
historical sense is truncated at 400
years ago and that's really odd because
so many of them are biologists you know
and and they should be thinking across
the millennia now that can be a problem
for religious thinkers too because it
isn't obvious that the world view of the
bible is a 13 billion year old cosmos
but you know i i don't believe that our
notion of rights
is an enlightenment product i think the
enlightenment articulated an implicit
judeo-christian view of man
and and expressed it brilliantly in many
political documents but that the roots
of that explicit
construction were mythological and
ritual and and centuries or millennia or
or or
or were far past that old and i actually
don't think that's debatable i think the
idea that
you know
the the the dignity of the human being
and the rights of man emerged
in the renaissance let's say in the
enlightenment and out of nothing is a
completely absurd proposition it's much
more
reasonable historically to look at the
at the
narrative precursors to that idea
yeah no i i i agree entirely with that i
mean there's it has been established
that
the notion of of
natural human rights can be found in the
13th century in in the medieval period
and uh larry seedentop recently wrote a
book called the origins of individuality
where
uh he he
locates the the the notion of
the the the value of the human
individual in
a biblical christian narrative i mean
the the kind of archetype of the
individual is the prophet the one who
yes who respond to the call of god
is called out from the mass of people
and indeed
poor old jeremiah is is is called out to
speak against his people alone
um
and it's it's it's that
uh it's it's the relationship between
the individual and the and the call of
god that it says creates the individual
and draws them out of of the mass right
one you see that so often in the genesis
stories i mean abraham's a classic
example of that too i mean he's he's a
failure to begin with i mean he's like
80 years old and still living in his
dad's tent
and then he's called by god and so this
lowly guy who's a non-starter is called
by god and all that happens to him for
the first section of the story is one
bloody awful catastrophe after another
it's like and you think well do you
believe these stories well here's the
question is what's not to believe about
that
it's like there you are you're a dismal
failure and you're not living up to your
potential and then some you're inspired
by something that forces you outside of
your of your proximal self and makes you
feel guilty and ashamed if you don't
manifest it an enthusiastic which means
possessed by god if you do manifest it
and then you do and then like it's one
catastrophe after another it's like who
doesn't believe that how is that not
life
i mean it seems like they're at least
sort of three possibilities there's a
kind of the enlightenment
uh creationist account of dignity just
coming out of ex nihilo coming out of
nowhere with uh
uh uh with with kant and and others
uh that says which gives a kind of
universalist basis to rights and a kind
of cosmopolitanism that is based on pure
rationality and nothing else
uh and we don't believe the city stories
anymore okay so here's a here's
something that's interesting james so
let's say that's true well then why not
postmodern critique that rationality out
of existence if there's nothing behind
it that is more fundamental than a mere
proximal european rational construction
why can't we just blow it away first of
all attribute it to the west which i
think is a big mistake because i don't
believe that's true but then also just
replace it with another rational
construction if there's nothing
transcendent about it
nothing deep well
i i think
a quick answer to that is to say we
didn't need to wait for the
post-modernist we simply needed to wait
for the 1790s and the reign of terror
that was orchestrated of course by
devotees of the cult literally devotees
of the cult of reason that was set up in
in notre dame proclaiming liberty
equality in fraternity even as the
bloods and the heads were
running in the streets right and in the
cathedral as you point out which is so
symbolically relevant
indeed indeed so so the question that
then is that you know what we now can't
take seriously the kantian claims of
to the to universal reason and we can't
really take seriously that and i think
the post-modernist would have have some
there's a there's force to what they
have to say
uh that uh deracinated reason that uh
tears us away from any kind of locality
any kind of
the sort of messy contingency of human
development and human upbringing i mean
it's not an accident as some people like
to point out that kant
never had children and and never went
further than 10 miles of of koenigsberg
and and yet had this this this this
extraordinary impact i think it was the
german poet heiner who said that uh kant
was far far more deadly than robespierre
because whereas robespierre simply uh
decapitated a king
kant decapitated god that is to say it
would be helpful i think for the
audience for you to talk a little bit
about count because they're not going to
be familiar in the in that way so well
so
i mean just an a kind of a 90-second
digest i mean can't uh he 1724 to 1804
known as the kind of the sage of
koenigsberg which is kaliningrad now now
prussia uh
broadly speaking he has had an enormous
impact a subterranean influence these
days i think because he's just so darn
difficult to read german is really only
just becoming a philosophical language a
lot of his early writings are in are in
latin but the the explosion occurs in
1781 with the critique of pure reason
and what's so fascinating about that is
that it's a critique
that it of reason that is to say
critique of reasons tendency always to
overreach itself beyond what could
possibly give and be given and sense
experience and so he's got the critic
the metaphysicians and the rationalists
leibniz and and descartes and so on in
his sights there is that but it's also
if milton's milton's warning about the
dominance of satan just out of curiosity
because i always saw
milton satan is always trying to
transcend god
yes and he's the light bringer right in
the spirit of rationality in some real
sense yes yes yes
well there are some who would
characterize kant's impact like that
certainly but in that period 1781 to
1790 he's just as it were it's the
critical philosophy he gets starts to
get more interested in tr in 1793 with
the notion of evil and suddenly evil
comes back in something that was
inexplicable within the terms of the
critical philosophy he suddenly realizes
that that there's something that that
that can't be reasoned and it's
interestingly not it's not the good
which is tended to occupy uh uh plato
and aristotle and aquinas it's it it's
evil um and perhaps he was a perhaps he
was affected by reports of what was
going on in in paris in the early 1790s
who knows but his impact is enormous if
we when we talk about the turn to the
self and the enlightenment period there
are many important figures but i think
kant is the as the paradigm he he's the
archetype he's the point of no return
there are very few philosophers in the
history of philosophy where which as it
were you can describe with the adjective
pre and post there's socrates everyone
who comes before socrates is a
pre-socratic even though there was some
very fine philosophers before socrates
and similarly we talk about pre-kantian
and post-cantian philosophies so his
impact is enormous in terms of this turn
to the self the primacy of reason
confidence in cosmopolitanism
and a certain very coherent account of
the role of subjectivity uh in
aesthetics and a account of the moral
life and ethics just obligation not the
good that is entirely
sealed in to the sphere of practical
reason ethical reason
and uh he
then okay so you know you started this
or at least to some degree with a a
discussion of what happened in notre
dame cathedral with the elevation of
reason and so and i thought about milton
at that point and so
is this
is it reasonable to point to kant and
say kant is the philosopher who in the
west and the enlightenment figure who
elevated reason to the position that god
once occupied
i think that's a fair summary of what
how a lot of people will would interpret
kant's impact some would take a positive
view of that some yeah
it's the birth of secularism we don't
and and and it's not so much
an antipathy to religion and to god
there's also a sense of hope and
optimism
well well and warranted i mean look what
happened when everybody
became able to think i mean that our
technological mastery is is part and
parcel of that process it's it's not all
negative but but it's still a matter of
getting everything in its proper place
you know i mean i read milton as warning
as a warning that when reason is
elevated to the highest place that hell
follows quickly behind and i think about
that for example there's nothing more
rational than marxism
all the axioms are wrong
but all the logic that flows from the
axioms is perfectly rational perfectly
logical and i mean that's why
solzhenitsyn was able to make the case
that what happened under stellen was
true communism
it was the axioms playing themselves out
they were arrayed logically and so
rationality i've been talking to some
cognitive scientists recently too you
know and they're interested in
artificial intelligence and the
development of independent thinking
machines and
the people who are really working hard
on that are very very interested in the
idea of embodiment
because they're not convinced that
intelligent systems abstract systems
even can exist in the absence of
embodiment that embodiment is tied to
and so there's a there's an element of
embodiment that's sort of something like
the proximal concerns that you were
talking about that seems necessary for
for proper cognitive operations to take
place
so one of the interesting things about
canton and i think he's he's onto
something here is that one of the things
that haunted him was the idea that what
can be given in sense experience
and our understanding what was then a
new
new fully newtonian
physical universe didn't fit in couldn't
accommodate what really mattered uh
rationality
the soul freedom and god and this
worried him he was trying to develop a
way that of of understanding and making
room for for these notions and i think
with with ai and cognitive science and
so on i mean my my worry is always well
first of all i i want to ask the
cognitive science the scientists
have you cracked the mind body problem
that is to say do you think hard they're
trying they're trying hard
and in a sophisticated way you know as
far as i can see well
the the but the question of the the the
mind body problem is whether or not a
complete science the most sophisticated
science that it was possible to generate
could
fathom the mysteries of consciousness
that is to say could purely physical
causal processes generate reason
intelligence and consciousness yeah well
i think the answer to that is yes but
when that happens our notion of matter
will be radically transformed right
because that it sort of assumes that we
understand matter and we don't
understand consciousness it's like no we
don't understand either and when we
understand both both will be radically
different
well it's uh it's certainly the case
that in in anglo-american philosophies
the the what was unthinkable is now a
live option in the philosophy of mind
and that is this doctrine of
pan-psychism
the idea that the concrete material
universe
somehow exhibits
uh
mind like or conscious properties and
that's okay okay so i'm gonna make a
segue from that so i had been playing
with some ideas here recently that if
you guys don't mind i'd like to run by
you a bit and i've i've been thinking
about what people might mean when they
talk about god and i i want to tell you
how i got to this point first so there's
this idea that's coming out of this
post-modern and marxist critique of the
west that the primary organizing
principle of west of
first of all that social institutions in
the west are structured according to
western axioms that's the first one and
the second one is is that they're
structured according to the arbitrary
expression of power
and
we'll start with the second one i think
that is
antithetical to the truth
and the reason i think that is because
when i've met men of goodwill
who are successful in functional
organizations
they're creative and productive and
honest and generous and kind and mentors
and they might deviate from that when
their desire for power overtakes them
but that's a deviation from the genuine
spirit
and so then i was thinking
i had this vision at one point and it
was like an ancestral vision it gave me
some insight into ancestor worship and i
had this vision of all these men that
had had an influence on me
in my life i could see them all and and
it was like the positive elements of
them were the same
and then that sort of extended back into
history a bit i was thinking about
historical figures and this spirit
shining through
and i thought well the the spirit that
shines through the ancestral figures
that's equivalent to the old testament
god that's the animating spirit of
civilization
now i'm not i'm not making a
metaphysical claim here i'm not i'm
saying that
you know we already talked about the
fact that when we're in a deep
conversation there's something the same
about us that's operating and i would
say like a biologist like evil wilson
would agree with that we wouldn't be
able to communicate with one another if
we were talking about something that was
fundamentally human because we wouldn't
understand our axiomatic presuppositions
so we have to be speaking from the
particular to the universal in order for
us to communicate
so the question is what's the nature of
the spirit that inhabits you when you're
doing that and then i think of it as
this benevolent spirit that operates
through history it's responsible for the
for the golden thread of philosophical
conversation down the ages and that
would include the spirit that array that
wrote and arranged the bible operating
in different human beings and and that's
a that's a nod to the notion of its
divine inspiration
and so i was thinking these these aren't
attributes of god that that the atheists
consider because they reduce it to a set
of relatively absurd axiomatic
presuppositions
but there are experiential elements to
this and so
i think we exist within a hierarchy of
values and that that that selects our
attention because you pay attention to
what you value and there's a unifying
tendency in that hierarchy of values
because it it has to be unified because
otherwise you exist in contradiction
with yourself and everyone else so
there's a tendency towards unity so
that's part of this paternal spirit
i think the merce eliad made much of the
war of gods in mythologies it's a very
very common theme
and what happens is the god's war and
one god comes out as superior he's the
dominant god and i thought well that's
associated with the moving together of
tribes
each tribe has its own narrative and
it's represented by a set of deities and
when the tribes unite in conflict and
cooperation their religious stories
fight in abstract space and there's this
proclivity across time for that to
organize itself into something like a
unity that that's the origin of
monotheism and that's the spirit of god
as well and then i thought i won't go
through all these attributes but because
i can bring them up one at a time but
then another one is
i was thinking about
this common trope in american sports
movies and i'm pointing to them for a
particular reason when you're engaged in
a sport you're trying to hit a target
and if you do it well then everyone
celebrates you and that's the opposite
of hamartia that's the opposite of
missing the mark and so there's this
collective celebration of the tendency
of excellence in cooperation and
competition to hit the mark and
everybody celebrates that's worship
everyone worships that they don't even
notice it that's the same spirit and
then
there's this movie theme and the
americans are very good at mythologizing
this sort of thing so you imagine that
the
the victorious quarterback is carried
out of the stadium on the shoulders of
his teammates supported by his school
and the town in triumph and the
cheerleaders are waiting for him
and you think well why would men elect
one of their
members to be the most attractive
and the answer to that is because that's
how you see the path it's something like
that and that's a manifestation of the
same spirit that's not power
and so this thing that we re and then
i'll close with this one of the things
that really hit me when i was doing my
genesis lectures was the realization
that the word israel meant those who
struggle with god
and i think that's a way better
definition of belief
true belief than
reliance on an axiomatic set of explicit
presuppositions it's like this is
something you contend with right it's
like what's the ideal is there an ideal
if there is an ideal
of what nature is it is it a personality
how does it manifest itself across time
we don't know the answers to this but we
can definitely wrestle with the
we wrestle with uh
we wrestle with that and and that's
that's the right pathway i think is the
wrestling rather than the dogmatic
insistence that a particular
sorry well that's a lot um
can i can i wind you back to your early
earlier
uh impassioned statement that i you're
not making a mis
metaphysical claim here
because it seems to me that
the phenomenon pushes in the
metaphysical direction in this sense
that you're talking about
uh all these people who have
shaped you
for the for the good
um
and in a sense it's as if they've been
animated by
a kind of spirit of benevolent spirit um
well you know if you know as it were
remain strictly secular secularist or
naturalist then in a sense this spirit
is simply a product of these people
but but
now i i suggest that the
the the lived experience if you like or
the phenomenon of the spirit as
experienced by these people is not that
they possess it
rather than it possesses them absolutely
it obliges them
so so in a sense
uh
the phenomenon
pushes toward something that is
metaphysical
well okay so let's okay so let me add
another wrinkle to this that's related
to something that james that james said
well we talked about consciousness per
se right and this is where the
metaphysical starts to become
interesting is that this spirit that
calls
and impels and judges as well
and and is in part the voice of
conscience and all of that
i can't distinguish it from the active
action of consciousness per se
and we don't understand the metaphysical
status of consciousness now one of the
things i've been thinking for example i
wanted to talk to richard dawkins about
this and i'm afraid he'd slash me into
ribbons so i'm i'm somewhat hesitant to
do it but
you know darwin talked about natural
selection a lot but he also talked about
sexual selection a lot
and until recently last 30 years or so
biologists tend to concentrate on more
on natural selection but
you know women are hypergamous in the
extreme they mate up and across
hierarchies of competence or power i
think competence
fundamentally
and that means that our whole
evolutionary history was shaped by the
selection of consciousness
and so like the the the
the mechanism that generates random
variation and allows
for the menu from which the selection is
made that might be random but the
selection process is bloody well not
random and it looks to me like men's
consciousness elevates men to positions
of status and women's consciousness
selects those men and they're not
selected on the basis of power that's
not true that's not even true of
chimpanzees by the way and they're more
violent and much more primitive than we
are
so like that deep ethic that we're
talking about that doesn't run itself
out even it's certainly not only western
it doesn't even look like it's only
human
and franz dewall who i'm going to be
talking to at some point on this podcast
has made very much of that you know that
there's this natural ethic that you see
emerging in chimpanzee behavior in their
in their hierarchical behavior within
troops
so he said the tyrannical chimps get
torn to shreds by their subordinates who
band together you can dominate the group
with power but it's very unstable
if i could just chip in here i mean well
it's obviously the case that there are
um behavioral patterns that can be
described as certainly altruistic and
that we as it were can describe as
ethical and it's certainly the case
jordan that you can
you can as it were theorize that what's
going on in say sexual selection is the
operation of of consciousness but don't
forget that somebody like dawkins is
going to say that there simply is no
such thing there is no such thing as
consciousness if by consciousness you
understand some element of reality some
ontological ingredient of reality that
is somehow not fully reducible to
underlying neurological states
i read dennett's book on consciousness
which was aptly criticized as
consciousness explained away it's by no
means the best book i read on
consciousness because i don't think it
wrestles with because
the ontological significance of
consciousness is equivalent to the
ontological significance of being
because the mystery the mystery question
is
how is there anything without awareness
of it and good luck good luck solving
that issue and and even if it is
reducible to the material my answer to
that is well that'll just make material
transcendent in a way that we don't
understand so you can't say you have
omniscient knowledge of the structure of
matter and consciousness is reducible to
that it's like no you don't you don't
know anything about matter at the
fundamental quantum level let's say it's
so mysterious and peculiar
absolutely but what we can at least say
and this is a very kantian thought that
it's a condition of the possibility of
any successful empirical or scientific
inquiry into the way the world is that
we are a subject that we exercise our
consciousness we exercise our reason and
we exercise uh the laws of thought so so
i agree with you i mean i think those
the the problem with the new atheists is
not so much their atheism it's their a
priori commitment to the doctrine of
metaphysical naturalism which is roughly
the idea that all truths are scientific
truths or reducible to scientific truths
and it's a non-starter the far more
interesting golden thread that you
talked about earlier the sometimes known
as the perennial philosophy yes exactly
that
uh uh it is it is the thought that that
being
uh capital b being is is the the
fundamental metaphysical question and
once you start approaching
deep philosophical problems in that way
then you do start to see a remarkable
convergence between abrahamic monotheism
uh
vedanta and upanishads the question of
whether brahman and atman are one that
is say being and and mind and the self
are one uh we see it uh
those sorts of questions are are
are also not particular to religious
systems so think of somebody like
heidegger you know a heidegger is
supposed to have spawned the kind of the
great atheistic tendencies in 20th
century existentialists and
phenomenological philosophy he says the
fundamental question is
why is there something rather than
nothing absolutely why being absolutely
yeah yeah yeah
so okay so so there's the metaphysical
so part of what this hinges on is the
metaphysical status of consciousness and
and you can make a case that that's
equivalent to to this question is well
what
i mean david chalmers who's
maybe the most the most well-known
cognitive scientist studied
consciousness you know he's he he he has
one set of
the hard question you know the hard
question about consciousness but for me
the hard question is the question of
being
itself because i can't distinguish
between being in awareness you can think
well there's an objective world without
subjectivity it's like well try to think
that through and see how far you get
it just you just run into problem after
problem with it and
i mean there's technical problems at the
level of physics as well but there's
certainly metaphysical problems and so
so then the question is well what is the
what is the cosmological significance of
consciousness and and that that's a
central question right maybe that's the
central question and
when i look at the inside of a
christian cathedral and i see the logos
spread out against the sky because
that's what the dome is as affiliated
with the sun there's this proposition
that consciousness is what engenders
reality itself and that we partake in
that and let's say we abandon that
notion it's like okay well then do you
have any dignity as an individual
and then we get into the post-modern
question is well are you there as an
individual at all are you just this is
part of the identity issue are you just
one of your immutable physiological
characteristics right your sex your
gender your race that's matter man and
there's no individual soul there well
why can't i just reduce you to that
what are you going to use as an argument
well i just have just a very quick
thought if i may i i don't want to uh
sort of keep butting into too much but a
very good line for dawkins and others to
remember and
you should remind him of it if he comes
on your podcast is that metaphysics
always buries its undertakers
that is to say
every time there's an attempt to say we
can all of that mumbo jumbo that was
being talked about by those clever
philosophers or those uh stupid
religionists that's all that's all gone
now
that's that's a warning sign it's a sign
that there's actually total total
confusion and all sorts of kind of kind
of fragmentation in
the the the quest for meaning in the
quest for the answer to to the question
of the meaning of uh is that the
abandonment of the perennial philosophy
it's an attempt certainly to to reject
it uh and um i mean if you look in say
pedantic systems you look in indian
philosophy there were materialists
um
there was a school of materialism but it
was
but it was it was a relatively small and
short-lived um
belief system you see materialism in the
uh greek roman world you see it in
democritus democritus is atomism you see
it in epicurus of course um but it is it
is it is a minority report
uh
there is it's quite a it's a strange
superstition
in in ancient thought
and i mean just to talk it apart a bit
james because you mentioned earlier that
among i think it was cognitive
scientists that you were discussing that
discussion of pan psychism has become
non-heretical
because there's notion that there's a
mystery in matter see but it isn't
materialism in in exactly that's the
fault it's perhaps perhaps it's it's
deterministic clockwork materialism
that's essentially newtonian
and right and we know that's not right i
mean it's proximally right but but
but beyond that it's not right matter is
very deep mystery and i can't see how
you can get rid of the problem of
consciousness by
positing a materialist substrate when
there's no way that you can get rid of
the metaphysics of matter
very quickly i mean you mentioned david
chalmers as you say this brilliant young
philosopher who in 1994 published his
phd thesis the conscious mind which
brought back in onto the table
that what he called the hard problem of
consciousness
uh and he passed that in different ways
that there's something absolutely
irreducible about qualitative experience
but the problem that then opens up that
he that then i think leads him towards
taking pan psychism very very seriously
this is just really in the last 10 years
i think is the idea well okay we've got
consciousness it's a hard problem we
just can't get rid of it and yet we
can't get rid of matter either we can't
get rid of the the truths of the
physical sciences and we but we can't
work out how on earth these fit together
they couldn't be laws of nature they
couldn't be psychoanalytic or
psychological laws the laws of thought
are fundamentally different from the
laws of nature so how do we fit these
two together
and pan psychism at that point though it
might seem crazy to the person on the
street suddenly start to seem quite an
attract
an
attractive account of the nature of
ultimate reality
and i suppose just to just as a quick
footnote to that once you're there
materialism dawkinsian materialism is is
dickensian and long gone
and the dialogue between
the perennial philosophy
and pan and anglophone philosophy of
panzeikis is back on
so elaborate on that that's what stopped
me exactly because now i'm trying to
figure out well there's this we should
define pan psychism again for the
audience but then okay so what sort of
dialogue does that open up as far as
you're concerned
well my view is that psychists it's it's
early days and uh at least in its modern
contemporary iteration i think you can
say that aristotle if you read the day
anima aristotle's treaties on the soul
there's soul all over the place that the
plants have a nutrition animals have a
perceptual soul and human animals have
both of those and irrational rational
souls so as it were all of organic life
is minded
um if you move to the basic framework of
abrahamic monotheism then look if it
follows very naturally that if you've
got an axiomatic commitment to
mind at the bottom of the universe as it
were
my
the creator is a is a minded being is
ideal it's not material and everything
all of reality distinct from god
is created and including as it were
space-time then the idea that it's that
the the universe as we discover it as we
come upon it is shot through with mind
is legible to mind to to the minded
inquiry that happens
when cognitive scientists are trying to
uh uh unravel the mystery of the brain
it's suddenly you've got an isomorphism
there between consciousness so does that
mean does that mean that
there's this insistence in in the
judeo-christian tradition that
god is outside of the material world and
outside of time and space and that what
that does in some sense is deaden
material it deadens matter and then when
god disappears we're left with dead
matter
so so where's the dialogue between the
the advocates of the judeo-christian
tradition and the pan psychists
well
there's only one time that aquinas ever
loses his cool in about 10 million words
that that he wrote but one is with this
poor guy called david adino who dared to
suggest that god might be a material
being
uh which to which aquinas said uh queer
est idiotus which is simply stupid
so
the idea that the creator could be
somehow bound up with his creation was a
simple logical impossibility within
abrahamic monotheism is there any
difference between the mind body problem
and the god the spirit and the material
world problem are they the same problem
on two different planes
uh jordan that's an extremely uh acute
question and it's one that has uh
puzzled me for for a long time or at
least attracted me i think you're
absolutely right to say that there are
all sorts of interesting structural
metaphysical and theoretical parallels
between
understanding and fathoming the god
world relation
and as it were the mind world
relationship the human mind
the soul or the soul world relationship
right because absolutely no it it i mean
it it could be that we're the contact
point between
god outside of time and space in the
material world but then that does big
the proquest in the pan psychism
question which is a very interesting one
so
that's precisely the claim of
christology
i don't have a lot to say to to this
discussion but just just two points
jordan a moment ago you you talked about
you know in the you
christian vision
uh god is is other and absent and matter
is there deadened because that's not
quite true is it because in the
judeo-christian tradition the spirit of
god
is present in the world
uh and also you have the incarnation so
so uh even if one doesn't want to say
uh uh what one doesn't want to be stupid
as as aquinas thought and say god is
material i don't want to say that
certainly uh it's not true to say that
that god and the material world are
divorced they're not
so that's one i wouldn't say i wouldn't
say that i wouldn't say that it's i i'm
thinking about it
i'm i'm trying to think about it with
regards to the idea of this this
animating spirit the let's let's say
let's say that part of see one of the
things i've thought is that at minimum
what christianity is is a
thousands of years long discussion about
what constitutes the human ideal
it's a purely psychological viewpoint
now i i understand the metaphysical
implications you know that and i don't
want to dispense with them but it's best
to start with what's simple
so there's this discussion of of of what
constitutes the ideal and we're we're
we're exploring it and discussing it and
we explore and discuss it in all sorts
of interesting ways right because it's
not merely rational we
bach writes this
soul-inspiring music
and that makes us feel a particular way
and that's a hint as to the nature of
the ideal and then there's these great
cathedrals that are built all across
europe and they're awe-inspiring
masterpieces of stone and light right so
opposites conjoined and they bring the
primeval forest into the city and they
provide color and the music is set in
there and then there's the invocation of
the ancestors and and and the and the
and the dogmatic formulations that that
christianity consists of that go back
centuries as well and and all of that
and that's all part of this exploration
and to me it's the exploration of that
central animating spirit and when we're
debating the post-modernists who say
everything is power
this is the sort of thing that needs to
be pointed out as a rejoinder it's like
no it's not we're doing our best to
manifest this ideal that we're
discussing we're flawed and fragmented
and ignorant and we don't know so for
example you asked me earlier nigel
what sort of things i had to discuss in
order to make people attracted say to a
discussion of genesis and what it is is
that i i try to get the wheat from the
text and
and in the chaff i think a lot of that's
my ignorance it's not necessarily chaff
but i'll leave it be because i can't i
don't have the intellectual wherewithal
to make sense of it so i just leave it
be without despising it because i can't
understand it doesn't mean there isn't
something to it now
you know we're still stuck because we
have problems like well the idea of the
resurrection you know which
is obviously
a very big problem in in in a very
fundamental sense and i leave that be
except to say that i have seen you know
in my studies of mythology that there
are stories of dying and resurrecting
gods throughout history and the idea of
christ seems to be of that type although
it's not only that but it's something i
can't touch and that's a problem but
that doesn't mean that there isn't this
investigation that we're all undertaking
including us in this conversation of
what constitutes the ideal and how we
could manifest it if we could only
understand it
and i think that's unbelievably
compelling to people and it's it's it's
not only compelling they die without it
it
because we can't live with only
knowledge of our limitations
we have to be moving towards an idea
well i mean just just a quick quick
thought there i mean
certainly within the christian tradition
the claim is that
uh
god's decision to become incarnate is
not accidental he chose this particular
human being not just because he had to
choose some human being in order to
become a human being
but he chose a human being and as it
were exhibited the qualities that he
wanted to as it were
disseminate as a kind of moral exemplar
that were profoundly cult
counter-cultural to the values and the
the exemplars of the time um so you you
think of the kind of uh the the the
weakness of christ in some context the
sort of the
obviously the sense of self-sacrifice
the radical openness to
those on the margins the poor in
particular
uh the the uh ceremonially unclean and
of course to to to women and so it's as
if that this is completely subverting
the kind of the sort of power narrative
that dominated uh
first century palestine particularly in
the form of the
um the the sort of the roman legions and
and the roman uh imperium and so so i i
think that's a that's a quick thought
could i say something very quickly on
the
the resurrection and dying and rising
gods
please please do point
i mean it
it it's a i'm not a specialist in the
sort of the history of the kind of
mythology but i think that you know a
lot of those myths are in the first
instance
effectively myths and understood as
myths by devotees of the various mystery
cults of
of the period so there are certain
claims made about uh
is it osiris
and
and others and there there's some
evidence that they are kind of fertility
gods but if i think if you dig deep into
the into the stories they're very very
different from the kind of narrative
rather shocking narrative that you have
in in the gospels that stress the
physicality of the resurrection union
like if you look at the story the story
of osiris is one that's really
fascinated me because yeah so the
egyptians this goes back to our
discussion about rationality so that
egyptians were trying to understand what
the most fundamental principle of
sovereignty they were trying to
understand the fundamental principle of
sovereignty so that would be something
they were trying to understand in
opposition to the presumption that it
was merely power so let's say you were
the pharaoh well what justified your
existence as the pharaoh and the answer
was you were the reincarnation of the
union of osiris and horus and so then
the question is what were those things
well horus isn't horus is more like
christ more like the individual osiris
is the father
and osiris is the state in fact the
provinces of egypt are regarded as parts
of osiris body so it's the body of the
state like the body of laws that's
another way of thinking about it and
osiris was willfully blind archaic
anachronistic and
what he was particularly willfully blind
to were the machinations of evil
and that's why he died because his evil
brother over through him
and so that that's a that's a cautionary
story about the consequence of the
blindness of the state now
he's a reanimated by horus
and horus isn't logic or rationality
horus is the i
and the i pays attention and so there's
something different there's something
very radically different between
attention and rationality like attention
is allowing things in in some sense
right it's opening yourself up to the
world and
horus is the falcon who can see
everywhere falcons have extremely acute
vision and he journeys to the underworld
where and osiris is down there dead and
reanimates them so horus is
the hero who
rescues the dying father from the
underworld and
there so that's part of the birth
the rebirth resurrection story there it
says what is the resurrecting principle
and the resurrecting principle is live
attention acting on dogmatic certainty
it's something like that it's a theory
of consciousness in some sense
it is i mean of course there are lots of
different versions of the story of
osiris i think i think the most popular
one has it that he's you know he's
ripped into 14 pieces and his sister
isis tries to sort of put him back
together in it but but you're right it
does end with him
um
in the underworld in this sort of shady
shadowy semi-conscious realm
he's he's divinized and this uh
generates all sorts of fascinating
mystery cults thereafter
and and what's interesting is that you
can you can do that sort of mythological
psycho analytic psychoanalytic analysis
quite quite easily that the stories lend
themselves to that kind of analysis
whereas i think what you're getting with
the early christian attempts to grapple
with this extraordinary and actually
offensive scandalous claim as paul talks
uh scandal to the jews and and and
craziness maria madness to the greeks
is is not that at all it this wasn't
what was supposed to happen uh he was
supposed to come along and and and throw
off the roman yoke not to sort of die in
this horribly ignominious way and then
suddenly coming back this was not what
second temple judaism was expecting
there's some evidence that there was a
there would be a resurrection at the end
of time but the idea that god would
become
uh
would be incarnate and as it were would
would would emerge and as i said earlier
leave his authenticating signature
through this very dramatic and as it
were plainly historical event was simply
not not part of their expectations at
all
so i was just saying they're very i
think there are clear differences
between the two and i think a lot of our
the temptation to see parallels really
comes from
um it's it's fraser really it's it's a
james fraser in the late 19th century
and and that gets picked up by some
french scholars i think and but i think
that the parallels
though those stories of absolutely
fascinating the actual parallels with
the new testament don't really stand up
for scrutiny that's just my view
jordan can i can i take us back a little
bit uh you you talked again about the
the
importance for people particularly young
people of this pursuit of the ideal and
way back you mentioned piaget and
his theory development and the stage of
development you call
the messianic stage
and i'm thinking about um
lots of uh contemporary young people uh
who who are
party to the crusade for social justice
over gender
anti-racist uh anti-colonial
and uh on the one hand i want to applaud
them i want to say yep um you you you've
invested yourself in
in um the cause of justice and that's
that's a worthy investment
um and then i observe you know
now as as in my own time when i was an
undergraduate
uh the the the adolescent
uh um
messianic crusade is of course it's it's
absolutist it's intolerant it's
convinced of its own rightness it's
intolerant of those who object and
patient with them
nowadays at social justice in the 1970s
when i was an undergraduate it was
marxism
um
but what's changed what's changed i
think is that
it's not just adolescents who are
invested in this social justice crusade
um
it seems as though the minions
is this what they're the minions yeah so
so so so who are the who who are they uh
who's driving it and and also um
i mean as a christian looking on this
that's us it's us you know it's our
failure to have conversations like this
that's driving it
really right because well i think so if
we were offering a sufficiently
attractive alternative then it wouldn't
be so powerful i mean because otherwise
we have to point to someone you know and
it just doesn't seem that useful to me
i mean that's interesting to to to to
give us some credit let's say uh
speaking broadly this is a hard problem
it's you know it's not like the answer
is so obvious but but i think it's best
to take it on as a failure of the
academy
that's right
because because the kind of conversation
we're having now is not the kind of
conversation you have in a university
classroom as a rule yes and it's
certainly not the kind of conversation
that i was allowed to have at cambridge
let's say
yes
yes yes so yeah as a consequence of what
we've been talking about so
yeah
um let me ask you a question guys
this is part of this spirit idea so i've
been thinking about
you know is power the central organizing
tendency and does that imply that power
is the central ambition of human beings
and then i thought well let's think
about the people that i know and admire
okay so then i think maybe about my
graduate student mentor robert peel and
so
i didn't really even know anyone in
graduate school when i went to graduate
school i didn't know what it was about
at all you know and
he took me under his wing i would say
and
treated me as a i wouldn't say as an
equal but as someone who had valid
things to say he always had time for me
and he allowed his
administrative acumen and his wide range
of resources to unite with my ability to
generate creative ideas and we
collaborated and it was great and i
never felt like i was in an exploitative
power relationship
i felt that he was a mentor and that and
then i that really got me to think
because all the people that i admire i
think one of the things that i found
that's so characteristic about them is
that they love the opportunity to find
people who are talented
and
worthy let's say and provide them with
opportunities and education and
advantages and a pathway to further
realization and then i thought
i don't think there is a more
fundamental pleasure than that and
that's part of that animating spirit and
that's not power it's like it's the
delight in and i tried to specify it
technically it's the delight you take
when the best in you can serve the best
in someone else
and that and that's
i guess my response to that jordan is
you know when when post-modernists talk
about power they always talk about it
cynically
it's oppressive power it's unjust power
and i want to say there's nothing wrong
with power
and in a sense you you can describe
the influence of of this man on you was
an exercise of a certain power a certain
authority authority for sure yeah so we
need to get past the notion that power
or even hierarchy are of themselves
wicked things when they can be but they
needn't be and my objection to the the
post-modernist view is it's it's it's
it's implausibly cynical it doesn't
apply everywhere it's unbelievably
cynical it couldn't i can't see how you
could possibly generate a more cynical
theory about what constitutes the
animating spirit of civilization
then it's the arbitrary expression of
power yeah
we all want power
nothing wrong with that
um but the trick is to to use it well
that everyone wants pogba no one likes
to be powerless
and why should we but we we need the
right kinds of power for the right kinds
of reasons well but when you speak about
power in that sense you want to be free
at least to some degree of the arbitrary
expression of power on the part of other
people yeah sure right and so
we need to differentiate what power
means it means authority
it means competence it means a wider
range of knowledge it means wider access
to resources it means wisdom like those
it means it means competent
and productive generosity and those are
much more powerful forces than the
arbitrary expression of power and that
it's only people who are failures
morally
that default to the use of power to
structure their social relations
like i can't see and i i haven't seen
this argument put forth in a
particularly coherent way it's like what
are you saying it's arbitrary power like
arbitrary power is actually a weak force
in comparison to these other modes of
social organization
and somehow we've been taken aback in
the academy we haven't been able to make
we're guilty i think we're guilty and
that's part of it and so the question is
then well what are we guilty about
and why is that undermining our moral
authority
yeah yeah
there's there's that old latin tag
abuses known toled usum that abuse does
not
uh invalidate use
and that just seems very obvious that
there are no power free zones and be
wary of the person who claims that they
are setting up a power free anarchy
they're often the most tyrannical and
and power hungry kinds of people and i
certainly i try with my first year
undergraduates we work through plato's
republic and one of the ways
traditionally it's understood of course
it is a dialogue about justice but it's
about also the proper dispersal and
arrangement
of power uh and you get this
power-hungry guy at the beginning of the
dialogue thrasymachus
who is clearly only interested in brute
strength and that is the only account of
justice he will give as it were the
power of the fist
and so i try to say that in fact this is
the kind of idea of power that is
animating figures like foucault but i
try to also underline that this is does
this does not eradicate the proper use
of power and i make this sort of
slightly kind of give the slightly silly
example of going to the dentist when i'm
at the dentist and i'm in the dentist
chair i do not accuse my dentist of
oppressing my molars
there is an appropriate asymmetry and
the relationship between me and my
dentist and just as they're because it's
voluntary
right and that's a huge part of it
they might be involuntary too so one of
the ironies i think is when we're
starting to talk about the university or
we're starting to talk about more sort
of hard left authoritarian
ideas of the market and and of the state
you are paradoxically getting antidotes
to uh the abuse of power that are in
fact extremely constrictive mechanisms
so um i mean this is a this is a
critique that comes up again and again
but whether we're talking about uh
the markets and the way that hayek talks
about or whether we're talking about the
english common law or whether we're
talking about the free pursuit of truth
in a thriving vibrant intellectual
culture
this cannot be imposed from the top
there must be what hayek talks about its
mechanisms of spontaneous order
piaget makes the same case and so do the
biologists who study
the emergence of morality from games
right it's the same idea i mean pancept
yak pancep showed that if you
rats will strive to juvenile rats strive
to play they'll work to rough and tumble
play which you'd think would be an
expression of power but and if you pair
a rat with another route that's 10
bigger the 10 bigger rat will pin the
smaller route and so you watch that once
and you think power but then you repair
them repeatedly and the next time they
meet the little rat asks the big rat to
play and there's ways they do that they
kind of look like the way dogs invite to
play and then the big rat will deign to
play but if he doesn't let the little
rat win one third of the time across
repeated play boats the little rat won't
play
and that's like that's rats you know and
now they have complex social hierarchies
but that's like that's a major league
finding right because even rat
hierarchies and they're not known for
their moral nature rats you know
there's more this element of play and
and and play is actually a specific
mammalian circuit and you know in a
conversation like this there's plenty of
play too and that's one of the things
that makes it extremely and so that
animating spirit is also the spirit of
play
right and play is play is the manner in
which we experiment with manifestations
of the ideal that's what play is
right
and and the point is that it's it's
organic it's as it were it's it's spirit
driven it's not rationalized it's not
imposed as it were from from the top
down there's a kind of um
organized chaos as it were chaos
permitted within certain parameters and
i think that's what any good driving
university wants to aim to be as it were
sorry that's what a wild garden is
right it's exactly that it's the
bordering of a zone where chaos can
manifest itself
and creatively right
right well then another way of thinking
saying it would be that the walls of the
university of the walls of any any
thriving intellectual culture should be
the walls of a walled garden uh so as it
were that the chaos
has parameters but there should be
complete freedom for the people who the
university is entrusted with uh research
and teaching to test and to pursue their
ideas some of them may be disastrously
wrong others will end up being
brilliantly right and there will over
time be a kind of
precisely through this freedom precisely
because it's implausible to suppose that
any to guess that three or four
brilliant academics will will have all
the answers to to all the questions that
there's a kind of um a sort of spirit of
intellectual inquiry that that animates
that seemingly quite chaotic process but
it what it's what yields uh uh i think
that is i mean i've had a vision of the
proper father within a family as
he who sets the parameters within which
play can occur so when children develop
it's their play is unbelievably
important i mean that's how they found
that's how they structure themselves and
their social relations and so if they're
deprived of play tanks have gen
demonstrated this too
um rats that are deprived of play
their prefrontal cortexes don't mature
properly and you can use attention
deficit disorder drugs like ritalin to
combat that behaviorally and then if you
let them play they have a burst of play
and their brains develop and so the
proper paternal spirit sets boundaries
which wall out too much chaos and allow
playful endeavor to manifest itself
within that walled enclosure and that's
part of this animating spirit as well
that's not power and it has this
spontaneity and this capacity for
spontaneity generation of spontaneous
order that you described
yeah yeah and look i i think that's also
where
belief systems can can help that is but
belief systems that are not too
prescriptive and so what we're looking
for are certain norms guard rails uh
coordinating that that help to animate
these these coordinating mechanisms that
are not too too prescriptive
um i want to talk to both of you about
this then so
you know if you look at
how people describe their religious
belief now
they're not going to church
and they they're not
admirers of dogma but they describe
themselves
in the majority as spiritual so there's
this spirit dogma
paradox now the problem and you see this
even in people like sam harris because
he's technically atheistic but he's very
interested in spiritual pursuits he
doesn't want to concretize that and
maybe that's because it would be then
become prone to rational critique and he
doesn't want to lose it right but the
thing is is that
you need dogma like
osiris and horus they're part parcel of
the same thing and you can't move ahead
without axiomatic presuppositions
the issue is they have to be
it seems to me and maybe this has to do
with the i the christian idea that
you're supposed to look for the evil
within
you know so you're destined to operate
with a set of axiomatic presuppositions
you can't help it you can't make a move
forward without it but you should be
cognizant at the same time that in many
ways that you don't understand that
you're radically wrong
and and and the play then is something
like an exploration of that
yes
absolutely i didn't even nigel wanted to
had any thoughts on that but yes i i
think um i i think that's that's
absolutely right um
i mean i think it was chesterton who
once said that the only alternative to
the doctrine of original sin is the
doctrine of original perfection it's a
kind of it's it's
what do we have a tendency towards
tendency towards the good that has been
corrupted towards towards the bad um
so i think
or
there is a sense that uh certainly
within
most established religions that there's
a kind of generally speaking an account
of human nature that has a story to tell
about
what the evil within us is and
what that tendency is and i think that
injects even at its even in the kind of
worst chapters in the history of
institutional religion a certain
humility a a certain
uh healthy pessimism
in the in the um
in the possibilities of of of human
being that are sort of a a kind of an
estimation that that there's going to be
fragility there's going to be uh
there's going to be a lot of mistakes
this is very very different from the
kind of jewy eyed
uh optimist
optimistic account of human nature that
we get that we get from for from the
enlightenment that you know all that
needs to be done is to clear away
superstition and then we can look
forward to as it were the the sunlit
uplands of of a perfect utopia where
everyone is is kind and nice to each
other um
well you know
the graveyards and and the concentration
camps of the 20th century have certainly
uh uh undercut
undercut that hope um
so yes i mean this
idea of fragility and that sense that
society somehow needs those sorts of
guard rails those sorts of those
parameters that will
anticipate um
mistakes and and human frailty is is
crucial governments struggle to deliver
that
right well
let me ask nigel a question here that
comes out of this discussion nigel you
talked earlier about the idea that
that that a religious belief in some
sense could be an inoculation against
idolatry and ideology and so i want to
ask you a bit more about that but with a
twist on this idea about evil because
one of the things that i don't like
about
the claim of oppressive patriarchy is
that it it identifies evil externally in
the social world right it's that
malevolence exists
so that's in that's kind of an original
sin variant you know the idea that there
is in fact malevolence and evil well
where is it okay
well it's in society and then it's in
this patriarchal spirit it's like well
that's really dangerous as far as i'm
concerned because
well if it's someone else and they're
evil then all the restraints are lifted
and we've seen that many many times in
the 20th century and there's a
christianity the christian idea i
believe and and i don't think it's
limited to christianity but it's very
well developed in christianity is that
the best place to search for evil is
within and you're you're likely to find
plenty of it as well and it'll keep you
occupied if you want something to do and
so is that part of an inoculation
yeah i think it is i mean just going
back to your earlier comments about
post-modernism it struck me
when post-modernists say that um
everything around us is about
power and the abuse of power
ironically it gives the post modernists
license
uh to abuse power in the treatment of
other people so for example
because i'm i'm white privileged and god
help me in oxford
nothing i say about let's say
colonialism is taken seriously because
of course it's only a rationalization of
my
my my social or political interests and
so
my critics
never take what i say seriously don't
listen to what i say constantly
misrepresent what i say
um
constantly do me injustices but it's
justified because they're in the right
and
i'm clearly
um um um motivated by unjust power
ironically of course they are abusing
power themselves but they don't see it
so it often struck me that that uh one
feature of
uh for want of a more scientific term
the the social justice
crusade is it is a kind of christian
heresy a heresy being a kind of
unbalanced form of christianity
because on the one hand
the social justice warrior has certainly
got the bit about
the the the um the moral ire of the old
testament prophets they got that bit
and hypothetical concern for the
dispossessed and and indeed absolutely
absolutely so so that that's all right
but what they lack is
a a christian sense of
compassion for
for weak feeble humanity which we all
are uh we're all crooked and and this
sense that
the line between good and evil runs
right down the middle of every one of us
so so therefore
no christian
can regard uh someone who's done wrong
as simply subhuman or of of another kind
than themselves because we're all
sinners
and it's that sense of of of universal
uh common sin that that generates the
the obligation of compassion even for
the long run so does that does that mean
does that mean technically then that you
judge
someone's character by how they treat
their enemies
and that's a fundamental christian claim
it's and you know because i do believe
very frequently that people who say the
central animating spirit of
civilization is power is a confession
and a desire both at the same time that
that's interesting yeah yeah i i really
believe that and and um
in in in any case so so the the issue of
the enemy
so i there's a couple of thoughts that
are jumbled together in my mind i'm
gonna so i was thinking one of the
things i tried to figure out for a very
long time was
why the snake in the garden of eden was
associated with satan it's a very very
weird thing and it's it's it's outside
the domain of rationality it's an
intuitive leap of unbelievable magnitude
it's it when i think i figured it out it
just about flattened me so
there's an idea that
the snake is the enemy of mankind and
that's a biological reality the serpent
the devouring serpent is the enemy of
mammals we could say that it's very old
idea so then the question is well we
have an enemy that we have to contend
with
right that's that's an adaptive question
we have what is the enemy well it's a
snake
well it's a snake in the garden and that
means that no matter how well you build
the walls and and how carefully you
aggregate the territory there's still
that possibility of malevolence and so
then the question is well what's the
malevolence well it's the snake well
maybe it's the existence of snakes but
then then it gets psychologized it's
like well it's the snake in your soul
you know it could be the snake in your
enemy
but then even more sophisticated it's
not no the ultimate enemy is the snake
in your soul and you see that right away
in genesis with the story of cain and
abel because kane is possessed by
the enemy the adversary right it's a
it's an analogy of the story it's an
analog of the relationship between
christ and satan
more concretized but it's so
sophisticated right because
the whole one of the things that
humanity has to figure out is what's our
enemy what what can destroy us it's like
well
the snake that that's natural world and
predation it's well what about that in
other people well yes what about that we
can demonize the enemy in no time but if
we're really sophisticated we think no
no no the most fundamental adversary is
the one within and then that also offers
the opportunity of something like a
romantic adventure because you can tell
young people
overthrow the oppressive patriarchal
tyrant
or you could say no you should seriously
contend with the evil within
that's a far more difficult endeavor and
a far more noble endeavor
and and it seems to me that that's
something
a religiously inspired humanities would
make that a central issue and that's
part of the building of character
so your point about the snake is is well
taken on the one hand it is a kind of
objectification of you more because they
the evil eyes and the snake right
but your point is well taken the snake
is in the garden
no one explained how it got there it's
just there it's in it's on the inside
not the outside
um
so so here's a question to you um
uh
that all makes sense and and what that
means is that
uh no human enemy
can can ever be entirely the enemy
because the enemy is also us
and so that that's a restraint on on
um the way which we treat
trying to lecture to my students about
nazism particularly the concentration
camp situation that the best way to
understand that is as a perpetrator not
a victim
oh yeah
but okay yes so
do your students your students get this
because they they're just
terrified of just those warriors don't
seem to get it
they're never got it they're never
taught it they don't take this you know
like i took the idea that there was
something to learn from nazism and and
what happened in in the communist states
seriously it's like
the idea there's an idea that's
promulgated
promoted in particular by by jewish
people and rightly so that
we should never forget what happened in
nazi germany
but then i think well what do you mean
forget you mean remember what do you
mean remember you mean understand well
what does it mean to understand that's
easy you're the perpetrator
so you have to think well would you have
been a nazi concentration camp guard
that's possible that the answer is no
but it's also possible that the answer
is yes because they were people and
there isn't there isn't that much
evidence
the evidence that they were all
psychopathic
that's that's pretty slim there there
were certainly psychopaths among them
and so that's a terrifying thing to
contend with it's like
you weren't the victim you weren't the
hero who rescued the jews
or maybe you're all of those you know
and fair enough we could investigate all
those possibilities but perpetrator
that's right up there man and then you
could see well the social justice
warriors are insisting upon that in some
sense too
because they say well look at the evil
it's like fair enough you know who can
who can dispute that
but but it's the locale it's because
they're not the responsibility isn't
within it becomes too easily
pathologized it that's what it looks
like to me and it and it takes away the
adventure i mean this is one of the
things that i've been trying to talk to
christian
professors
i don't mean professors technically but
about the fact that
this the adventure that's part and
parcel of this ethical process is not
sold enough to young people because they
would buy it if it was
it was as romantically portrayed as
the opportunity to participate in a
self-righteous riot i i i think you're
you're both on to something very very
important that the the as soon as we
start to
uh
ex
project sin and culpability onto systems
and structures right and away from from
individual agency
um things start to go very very badly
wrong i know that there's a i think they
believe there's a tradition in ignatian
catholic spirituality it's called the
contemplation lockheed where you are
supposed to this is a counter
reformation um
uh uh
idea where you're supposed to read the
gospels very very uh carefully and
you're supposed to imagine yourself
there and one common theme is that
you're supposed to imagine yourself at
the at the foot of the cross uh not as
it were as a friend or as a follower of
christ but as part of the mob
um
likely statistically
right and i i seem to remember that in
the filming of the passion of the christ
in 2004
mel gibson the hands that you see
hammering the nails of christ of the
actor playing christ jim cavazil into
the cross were mel gibson's
uh and so his point was that you you
that that sin is not other people
um and sin by the way is not a sin the
worst sin is assumption that it's other
people
right and i think increa increasingly
now the idea that it's that it can be
outsourced not just to systems and
structures
but to pathologies or therapeutic
conditions
and so the idea is that that sin is as i
said
just now that that it's not so much we
don't believe in sin anymore so much as
syndromes
which is profoundly disempowering that
is to say you're you're because you're
you're medicalizing you're
you're pathologizing your your
wrongdoing and as soon as you've done
that
you are
not able to address it or overcome it
you're not able to as it were develop
those habits of responsibility that you
that you write about so well and that i
think is part of the reason that that
young people are so sort of drawn drawn
to your ideas it is something because
when i tell overcomers
tell young people to clean up the room
it isn't because i think the room is
trivial
i think it's because their room is way
more important than they think it is
right and they can discover that and
it's part of this localization of of
ignorance and malevolence it's
and i think it is part of central
christian
thought that
it's more difficult to rule yourself
than to rule the city and that the prime
the prime place for motivation about the
sins of the world is to start with
yourself and how i can't see how that if
it isn't yourself then it's something
else right then it's something else well
then it's the natural world and and
resentment will arise from that or or
it's the place your forefathers built
right and
so
so now let's talk about this idea that
this movement is a heretical brand of
christianity or an offshoot of
christianity a bit it's one of the
questions you guys had forwarded to me
so
what are the similarities we talked
about a couple of them what are the
differences we talked about a couple of
them too i guess
is there anything else there to flesh
out so
on the one hand the similarity is the
the the
passion for justice and concern for the
for the marginalized and the pro that's
that's all good but there is this this
this notion that
yeah the the the problem lies elsewhere
a complete sense of of
self-righteousness and therefore a
complete lack of forgiveness or
compassion for
those whom you think are wrong um
i i mean i just just
going forward to the point you made i
mean you said you said
jordan that's that you know when you
impress this on your students you know
that that the source of evil may like
lie inside them and that it's possible
that they they might through weakness
have been a a camp guard not not a not a
liberator uh they're they're they're
scared by this notion and i can
understand why delight in cruelty it's
not mere weakness it's like don't be
thinking this this might not appeal in a
very remarkable way to the darkest parts
of your nature okay and that's a
terrible thing to investigate
so so but you know fear can be
paralyzing so so how do you move them
beyond that point and i i was thinking
well part of it is i tell i tell them or
make it implicit too that you cannot
understand your possibility for good
until you understand your possibility
for evil because you don't take yourself
seriously enough it's like well you're
kind of an 18 year old nerdy well or
maybe you're a 40 year old nerd well
what does it matter you're just a
collection of dust in some spec-like
place in the outer cosmos anyways it's
like no no you look at what you're
withholding and what you're inflicting
and unless you're going to say that pain
itself is irrelevant how can you say
that your sins are trivial and if
they're not well then you're not trivial
you're certainly not trivial as a
perpetrator so then the question is how
may how non-trivial could you be as a
savior instead of a perpetrator and so
that light's a spark it's like well and
all these kids they're looking who could
i be
well i say you could be a perpetrator
but you could be the opposite of that
whatever we could start with perpetrator
and we could flash out the opposite
yeah
and they're all they're they're on board
with that they're they're and no wonder
because like of course right
it it's certainly consistent jordan with
some very influential accounts of how
the holocaust could possibly have
happened
um leaving to one side this difficult
neuralgic debate about the the
uniqueness of the shower and so on i
think was it is it christopher browning
or richard browning the the that
extraordinary book christopher yeah
where where where he he studies that
that police battalion involved one of
the i think the one of the ironsets
group and
and just a staggering
normality of the people involved in that
conscripted they were not um die-hard
ideologues die-hard believers
some of the letters
they even objected they weren't punished
when they objected
yeah quite extraordinary it is it is
it's a deadly book
it's a terrifying book
it's it's incredible i always thought
hannah around had it backwards
yeah it's not the evil of banality it's
the banana it's not the banality of evil
it's the evil of benelli the evil of
penalty yes and i think that's a lovely
thing to tell undergraduates too it's
like your life is banel well that isn't
who you are that isn't who you should be
it's like this is the only thing that
can justify this suffering is a great
adventure it's well what's the greatest
adventure it's ethical endeavor and you
have to be able to say that without
cliche and and you say well you struggle
with the adversary within you want an
adventure and see what happens if you
tell the truth because you don't know
what's going to happen if you tell the
truth
because you're agenda free right it's
like you're not trying to manipulate the
world to deliver in in the heideggerian
sense of delivering standing resources
you're not an exploiter you're an
explorer
and and and you know all these kids they
come into the university with a veneer
of cynicism
and it's this deep because they're only
18 they're 19. there's there's no
cynicism there at all and then that
cynicism is fed and they get more
cynical and angry because well they came
to the place of wisdom and and were
turned away with with with more cynicism
now i was going to tell you guys i
talked to young me park and i i posted
this video the other day and she's a
defector from north korea and we went
through her story and
she wrote this book called
in order to live which is a harrowing
book
um although i don't think it's as
harrying to read as it is harrowing to
talk to her but in any case
her book ends in 2016. so i asked her
what did she do after 2016 and
she
went through high school and university
in south korea high school and all the
primary school in one year
locked herself in a room basically and
went through it all in one year and then
went to a south korean university which
and they're hard south korean
universities and then after she wrote
her book which was inspired by the way
by george orwell's animal farm
it was very interesting she went to
colombia to take humanity's degree and i
thought well what a remarkable story
this girl escapes from starvation and
famine and cruelty and totalitarianism
in north korea
slavery in china makes her way to new
york and goes to columbia university she
said it was the dream of her father that
she'd be educated and i said how was it
she said it was a total waste of time
and money
and i said it shocked me it really
shocked me because we just had to talk
about the ennobling
possibility of literature let's say with
regard to orwell
and i said
it was the only time in the whole
conversation that actually saw her
cynical which is really something to say
given what she'd been through i said
that can't be right that can't be right
like surely there was one
professor there was one course that led
you down the road of the perennial
philosophy let's say or that held up
that golden thread
and she thought she said
when i took a human biology course i
learned about evolution but it got
politically correct near the end
and that was it
she didn't she couldn't say one thing
about it and so
well if that's what young people are
receiving when they go to an august
institution like that it's no bloody
wonder their cynicism is redoubled
especially when that's what's taught to
them we're all power mad oppressors and
despoilers of the planet and
and then avatars of our group power
it's like how could you come out of that
anyway but entirely dispirited and also
angry
well
i i i've got to say just speaking just
speaking into defense of my
my own students or at least the
system as i
as i've experienced it
my students have been
you know quite extraordinary and very
very promising and they seem to have not
not really picked up any of these these
kind of ideological pathologies but i
think we at the same time do have to sit
back and and look at the problem more
widely and nigel and i have spoken about
this uh an awful lot in the last few
years through his experiences in oxford
and similar experiences here in
here in cambridge that um that there
does seem to be a a crisis of of the
university in the west a sense of uh
uh you might call it an identity crisis
a sense that we can't any longer answer
the question what are universities for
there's
one traditional way of thinking about
that and that is to say roughly speaking
there for the the pursuit of truth and
and goodness and and beauty and it's
going to be chaotic and messy
but then there are competing visions as
to what the university is called the
perennial philosophy i mean that just
seems to me to be self-evident as we're
we're having a conversation down the
generations about the nature of humanity
and its ideal and that's what the
university is there to foster so the
humanities are at the core
and then it branches out into science
and and and and and the professions but
that's the heart and the heart is this
discussion the perennial philosophy and
and it does i can't understand really
why that case isn't
made more
uh explicitly and also
in some sense somewhat self-evident i
mean i presume
that
i can't understand why we're so weak in
the face of this criticism it's like
what the hell's wrong with us is we
don't is it because we're called to be
explicit about things that that we don't
know how to be explicit about you know
we're taken aback by the critique in
some sense
i i think part of the problem jordan
might be just a structural one that the
university is no longer a university but
much more a multiversity and that we are
as it were increasingly fragmented
sometimes for very good reasons into
increasingly specialized silos
uh often even within the same
overarching discipline and one of the
things i love working
one of the reasons i love working in a
divinity faculty is that it does as it
were
have a single roughly speaking anyway a
single organizing horizon and so that i
can have colleagues who are sociologists
or anthropologists they work in eastern
religions
i'm a philosopher but they're
theologians historians textual
specialists and so on roughly speaking
we're part of a single a single
ecosystem but that is not not the case
elsewhere and so there's a kind of
fragmentation that makes it very very
difficult to have the sorts of
conversations to the tower that we've
been having it's a tower of babel
right now speaking voices languages yeah
perspectives
yeah yeah and what happens after that
that's after that's the flood
it's not been my experience among my
humanity colleagues who humanities
colleagues that
what they think they're about are the
kinds of deep existential questions that
the perennial philosophy raises i i
think a lot of them have lost sight of
what of what they're doing and why
they're doing it um
and i think that's part of the problem
i mean certainly when i started history
here in the 1970s most of it was
mind boring it was a soul destroying it
was it really tedious
because because
apart from the few courses where
actually
moral questions were raised
or even religious ones
um it wasn't really clear what the point
of this stuff was
i mean if i can say so nigel i think we
have a special responsibility as as
theologians or those those who who work
within theology two
which used to be of course the queen of
the sciences the idea being that it was
a
a a discipline not so much a discipline
but a kind of ecosystem of different
disciplines that did at least have some
story to tell about how all the
different avenues of human inquiry could
fit together and what place they might
have now even if that's completely wrong
it it as it were
what it would what would be required to
displace that integrated system would be
a
rival integrated system that was at
least comparable in terms of explanatory
power and capacity for to accommodate
all these different
different approaches well so in some
sense your your claim i think is that
you know if that unitary principle is
lacking and we talked about the unitary
principle as the spirit that engenders
the perennial philosophy if that unitary
spirit is fragmented and lacking then
something corrupt comes in to fill the
void or something partial or something
limping and crippled in in some sense
right
a pathologized religion and then that of
course leads to the question well how do
you know when a religion is pathologized
and when it's not but we got there to
some degree there today we say well part
of the hallmark of a religion that's got
its act together in some sense is that
it locates evil within rather than
without
and and that's that's an interesting
proposition and it seems
at least worthy of consideration
and yeah that's important because it
generates humility and therefore
generates a certain restraint in the way
you treat other people you disagree with
um
if you don't have that
you can't have a liberal space you have
people shouting each other
um so i think that's really
really important i mean and maybe part
of it too is is is the socratic
insistence upon ignorance it's like i'm
fundamentally ignorant and prone to
malevolence
fix me
right
it's something like that yeah yeah
and i mean who would argue with that
well socrates might argue with that i
mean socrates he does think that that
knowledge is is is is key that ignorance
is is the awareness of our epistemic
finitude is is crucial he thinks
malevolence and wrongdoing is just a
failure of knowledge so that so that as
it were moral failure is is a kind of
cognitive failure or it's an epistemic
failure and i mean aristotle can't can't
handle that at all he thinks that
there's actually something deep within
us that leads us to
to go wrong but but but yes i mean that
socratic idea the socratic principle of
of
dialectical diversity that is to say of
of kind of fruitful friction between
between two or more positions it's i
mean i i i think that that model which
is at the heart of the oxford and
cambridge uh model that is to say
broadly we do have lectures and we do
have seminars from graduate students but
that uh sort of the idea of a of a tutor
in a room a supervisor with one two
possibly three students and as it were
modeling that kind of dialogical
collaborative inquiry into the truth
is that's what we're doing is hopefully
right and and and you can like i said
it's very difficult to overstate the
audience hunger for that it's especially
when it's working i mean people are
drawn to it and and pleased very pleased
that it's happening and there's there's
there's public demand for i mean when i
talked you know this when i talked to
harrison
in in dublin in london we had like eight
thousand and ten thousand people and it
was a good faith conversation you know
and and
when we asked the audience if they
wanted to switch to q a or continue the
dialogue
they were overwhelmingly in support of
continuing the dialogue
and we've underestimated that we've
underestimated public intelligence
partly because of technological
shortcoming i think is that
there
there is a hunger for this and and it's
being fed by ideologies if it isn't fed
properly it's it's fed by ideologies
and
i don't know what to make of the
ignorance versus malevolence
idea you know i mean
it's a little a column and a little
column b because i do see the delight
like let me get tell you a quick story
so
you tell me if you think this is
ignorance or malevolence
so when i debated slavo zizek i did a
15-minute critique of the communist
manifesto and there were a lot of
radical leftists in the audience and
they'd come to hear zizek you know take
me apart although that isn't what
happened in the discussion we just had a
discussion
and um
i
mentioned at one point that the
communist manifesto was an incitement to
bloody violence and mayhem
and
like a fifth of the audience laughed and
cheered
and it was that that freudian revelation
of unconscious motivation you know
they're all individuals in the crowd so
they're masked they can they can
manifest their darkest motivations
without fear of revelation and it just
stopped me cold for about 10 seconds and
i thought yeah yeah no kidding it's like
we'll go dance in the streets when
things are burning and
is that towards some higher good or is
it just
it's about time those bastards got what
they deserved and it isn't obvious to me
that that's a manifestation of the
striving for higher good i mean it's
complicated right because
if you identify evil in some sense you
have an obligation to deal with it
but then if you don't identify the evil
that's within and you externalize it
your motives are suspect right away
because it's just too convenient and you
might say well that's ignorance and i do
think that's part of it but the
convenience factor is
it can't be overlooked like first of all
your your moral obligation is only to
persecute those who are evil so that
lifts a huge weight off your shoulders
and then you get to do anything terrible
you want because you've identified the
adversary himself and it's not you
and i
if that's
that if that's ignorance it's so deep
that it transforms itself at that point
into a kind of willfully blind
malevolence
that's how it looks to me
certainly that's true i mean i mean i
i've been reading more and more of renee
girard recently and the way he describes
these sort of crowd pathologies and the
way that a kind of uh um
a mob can as it were
lose its mind through
my metic desire through simply imitating
what they take the rest of the crowd to
to be doing um i find yes
they're imitating a central animating
spirit too right i mean
they're imitating something that that
you might think of as technically
satanic
and that animates the entire crowd and
and it's very difficult to explain
something like nazi germany without
going down that pathway
yeah yeah
yes
i i think that that's certainly right
and i think the problem in the modern
context is that technology and social
media in particular of course has kind
of catalyzed that that kind of
that that mania that that more
malevolent spirit in in the crowd and
and it's it's escalated that
um
that the possibilities of of ostracism
and
uh any kind of digital star chambers and
council culture and and and so on and so
forth
um
and uh it it's it's something that we're
gonna
as well the genie is out of the bottle
and it's very very difficult to work out
how how one can
come up with a clear diagnosis and a
clear prescription for how we how we get
i'll tell you something that's pretty
interesting is you know
when i have a conversation like this and
it goes well
and then thousands of people comment
the comments are unbelievably positive
and so it's possible for that
conversation to be de-pathologized
in the presence of the appropriate
conversation
i mean if you look at that conversation
with you on me park that the the
comments are so
unbelievably positive that it's it's
difficult there is they're as positive
in a shocking way as twitter mob
comments can be paused can be shocking
in a negative way and so then it's up to
people who can engage in
an intense dialogue at the edge of what
we know to do so and i think
increasingly to do so publicly because
that the technology affords us that
possibility yeah yeah yes it's not it's
not all bad
and it can offer forms of belonging even
though it's only virtual belonging
that that can really satisfy uh
an urge
for
um for community and um and a sense that
atomization the atomization that we've
seen over the last few decades can can
can be overcome yeah and i think a lot
of the possibility too of these
dialogical investigations that might
have been isolated to cambridge and
oxford to become part of the public
dialogue wouldn't that be something
so
i'm i'm pretty sure both sides would
would benefit from that sort of exchange
and another uh ground of hope is is my
consistent experience has been that the
the noisy shouty illiberal uh um people
are a minority uh there's a much larger
majority of people
who are uncertain and intimidated
uh but in the right circumstances could
be liberated and would welcome
this kind of honest
uh rational give and take
a reason kind of exchange um
so i think that that's a ground for hope
too and
whatever the
the uh disadvantages that the in
the disinhibiting effects of social
media are
well maybe we could get fortunate
continue this conversation at some point
at cambridge or oxford
some other people that would be really
good if we could manage it as far as i'm
concerned and once we can travel again
and
once i can travel i really like that i
thank you very much for agreeing to
participate in this and it's really good
to see both of you again and hopefully
we'll
at the right time do this again and
maybe with some other people too so if
you guys can think of some other people
that would be good contributors to this
you know we could open it up a bit and
that would be
if you think it's worthwhile that would
be
good as far as i'm concerned absolutely
but let's let's work on see each other
in the flesh over here sooner or later
i like that a lot i like that a lot
good thank you for having us jordan well
thank you very much for the conversation
i really appreciate it i have two
bye
[Music]
you